---
title: 'Unveiling JuliaSmoothOptimizers at JuMP-dev Workshop, JuliaCon 2023'
date: 2023-07-30
permalink: /posts/2023/07/talk/
tags:
  - programming
  - Julia
  - optimization
  - talk
---

I am thrilled to share my experiences from the recent [JuMP-dev workshop](https://jump.dev/meetings/jumpdev2023/) that took place at the JuliaCon 2023, held at MIT in Boston, USA.
As a passionate researcher in the field of numerical optimization, this year's conference was particularly special for me, as it marked my first in-person attendance after the previous year's online edition (read about it [here](https://tmigot.github.io/posts/2022/07/talk/)).
You can check the [replay of my talk on youtube](https://youtu.be/x52QlIb8E9Y?si=-TRB08B8qoFAvBxT).

[Talk Title: Optimization solvers in JuliaSmoothOptimizers](https://pretalx.com/juliacon2023/talk/HQSUYM/)

At this year's conference, I had the honor of presenting a talk titled "Optimization solvers in JuliaSmoothOptimizers".
In this presentation, I had the opportunity to provide an overview of the significant strides made in continuous nonlinear nonconvex optimization solvers by the JuliaSmoothOptimizers (JSO) organization.
It has been an exciting journey of growth and innovation, and the conference platform was the ideal place to unveil these remarkable developments.

## Abstract: Revolutionizing Optimization with JSOSuite.jl

The heart of my talk revolved around a package called JSOSuite.jl.
This new addition to the JuliaSmoothOptimizers ecosystem bridges the gap between users and JSO solvers.
JSOSuite.jl eliminates the need for users to be familiar with the nuances of various solvers like DCISolver.jl, FletcherPenaltySolver.jl, Percival.jl, RipQP.jl, and more. This leap in user-friendliness simplifies the optimization process and streamlines benchmarking algorithms. Notably, it paves the way for automatic algorithm selection based on specific problem characteristics.

One of the most promising features of JSOSuite.jl is its ability to facilitate benchmarking, making it easy to assess algorithm performance across different problems.
This empowers researchers to make informed choices about the best optimization strategies for their particular scenarios.

Furthermore, I highlighted the performance improvements achieved by the solvers in terms of execution speed and memory utilization. This progress is a testament to the dedication and expertise of the JSO community in refining and enhancing their tools.

## JuliaSmoothOptimizers: Forging the Path Forward

From my vantage point, JuliaSmoothOptimizers has solidified its position as a cutting-edge platform for studying numerical optimization and prototyping new algorithms. Over the past three years, the organization has evolved into a state-of-the-art hub for optimization enthusiasts, fostering collaboration and pushing the boundaries of what is achievable in this dynamic field.

As I reflect on my experience at JuliaCon 2023 and the incredible strides made by JuliaSmoothOptimizers, I am filled with a sense of excitement and anticipation for the future of numerical optimization. The innovations unveiled during this conference represent a significant step forward, and I am grateful to have been a part of this transformative journey.
